>>>>[THEME MUSIC] And I think
many people today don't
know what to believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>I felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory, and
we have, literally,
a hot program for you today,
spontaneous human combustion.
I kid you not.
Larry Arnold, our
special guest, he's
the director of the ParaScience
International Group.
They have been investigating
these cases since 1973.
Now you might ask, what is
spontaneous human combustion?
Well, let's ask
Larry about that.
Larry, first of all,
welcome to Beyond Belief.
>>LARRY ARNOLD:
Thank you, George.
A pleasure and privilege
to be with you today.
>>NOORY: When we have
talked on "Coast to Coast"
over the years about
this subject matter,
I get more emails afterwards
from so many people
because they're just
baffled by this.
Explain what this is,
spontaneous human combustion.
>>ARNOLD: Great place to start.
Spontaneous human
combustion is the ability
of a person to smoke,
blister, or burn
in the absence of contact with
a known, identifiable, nearby
burn agent.
If one rules out radiant heat,
high amperage electricity,
caustic chemicals, or an
open flame ignition source,
then by definition
one has to consider
the concept of spontaneous
human combustion,
when someone burns
sometimes completely,
more thoroughly than
can be accomplished even
in a crematorium retort.
>>NOORY: So they might be
sitting in a chair, on a couch,
in a car, someplace.
And all of a sudden, poof?
>>ARNOLD: This happens when
people are sitting or driving
in an automobile.
Happens when they're sitting
watching television at home.
Happens when they're
lying in bed.
Even happens when they're on a
boat in the middle of a lake.
>>NOORY: Geez.
Now how many of these
people might have cigarettes
with them, and they fall
asleep, and maybe it
catches fire on the couch?
Is that possible?
>>ARNOLD: It's certainly
possible that some of them
are smokers, absolutely yes.
But the question then becomes,
can a dropped cigarette
produce enough heat and
energy to literally dehydrate
the person who drops the
cigarette onto his or her body?
Our answer to that is no.
We've done
experimentation trying
to replicate one of
these classic scenes
of spontaneous human combustion
with an external ignition
source, such as a dropped
match or a carelessly tossed
cigarette.
We cannot consume our
experimental tissues to any way
remotely approaching what
happens in a classic case
of spontaneous human combustion.
Fire officials tend to
think in that direction
initially until
they've encountered
one of these remarkable cases in
their own professional careers.
And then they say, whoa, the
dropped cigarette doesn't work.
We need to think
of something else,
because they don't
have an answer.
>>NOORY: You've been
investigating these cases
since 1973.
How far back do
they actually go?
>>ARNOLD: Great question.
When SHC was a hotly
debated subject
in the 1700s and early 1800s
within the medical profession,
there were a number of cases
that led medical professionals
at that time to
think that SHC really
was a phenomenon that they
had to come to terms with.
Our research dates the
phenomenon even earlier
than that.
The earliest case we found in
the medical literature dates
to the early 1500s, involved
a knight named Polonius,
who was said to be quaffing
several goblets of wine
or liquor when he suddenly
exhaled flame from his mouth
and was said to quickly convert
his body into dry powder.
>>NOORY: Yes.
We're going to be
showing you pictures
throughout this program.
And if you have
a queasy stomach,
you may want to cover your eyes
a little bit, because what's
so strange about these episodes,
Larry, is that you would think
the environment around
these individuals
would be engulfed in flames.
They're not.
They're just the individual.
Just the individual
has been burned up.
>>ARNOLD: That is correct.
That's one of the
hallmarks that defines
a classic spontaneous
human combustion
scene from a normal fire
immolation fatality.
The fire is certainly
localized to begin with,
almost wholly isolated to the
body of the victim itself.
All indications
suggest that there
had to be an incredibly high
thermal component to this blaze
to burn the body to that extent.
And yet surrounding
combustibles,
linens, stacks of newspaper,
paint on a ceiling, furniture
next to the victim escape almost
wholly intact and undamaged
by flame or heat.
We also find a number
of cases that there's
a sweet, redolent perfume-like
aroma at the fire scene,
or no odor at all,
which is certainly
atypical of a normal fire
fatality scene, where
the odor is always described
to us by firefighters
as quite noxious.
So those are the
basic characteristics
one looks for in a
classic SHC fire scene.
If you've got those,
you've got to be
looking for the
external ignition source
if you want to dismiss SHC.
>>NOORY: Have there
ever been any witnesses?
People who have literally
seen somebody burn up?
>>ARNOLD: Yes.
And this is the
factor in our research
that the debunkers really
don't want to deal with.
We do have numerous
cases, both historically
and with people that
we have personally
had the privilege to interview,
that speak of witnessing
this phenomenon in progress.
Case in point, 1828 in
Brockville, Ontario, Canada.
Dr. Schofield crossed paths
with a 25-year-old resident
of the community.
Less than two hours later, he
got a call from a blacksmith
in town that said he had
discovered that same gentleman
standing in a
silver-colored flame.
Dr. Schofield
showed up, described
the victim as having
been burned to a crisp
from the top of his head
to the soles of his feet.
The victim had the "flame,"
and we put this in quotes
because we're not sure
that this is an oxidizing
type of combustion.
First off, an
oxidizing combustion
should be a yellow-red
flame, not silver in color.
The fire was put out,
but the gentleman
suffered such severe
damage to his body
that he later succumbed
to his burn injuries.
>>NOORY: Is this happening,
Larry, from the cellular level?
>>ARNOLD: It may
well be happening
from the cellular level.
It may also be happening at the
subatomic level in a person's
body.
It may be happening due to
factors cosmic or telluric
that are outside
the body, but which
western medicine
and western science
hasn't yet come to understand.
>>NOORY: Is the
combustion immediate,
or is it slow-burning?
Because I would assume if
somebody is going to combust
and it's slow, they can feel it.
They're getting hot.
Their temperature is going from
98.6 to God knows what level.
>>ARNOLD: It may go to
7,000 degrees Fahrenheit,
if one looks at the
evidence that nanochemistry
is presenting to this.
Certainly that's
sufficient temperature
to dehydrate of a human
body almost instantaneously.
The survivors that
we've spoken to
do not describe an
intense painful sensation
in the bodies, the
kind that one would
expect if you put your hand on
a hot stove burner, for example.
They describe to us a tingling
sensation, or a low heat
that moves through the body.
>>NOORY: Like a simmer?
>>ARNOLD: Like a simmer, yeah.
It can be instantaneous.
They're sitting in a
chair talking to a friend
or to their spouse, as we
are chatting right now.
And suddenly they
notice plumes of whitish
smoke gushing from the
flesh of their forearm.
No pain, no forewarning.
Just literally spontaneously
burning of the flesh.
>>NOORY: Might they be human
antennas, where there's
some kind of burst of
energy from the planet,
from the solar system, that
kind of beams in on them
and they just-- poof-- combust?
>>ARNOLD: That's a great
observation, George.
We believe so, in some cases.
We believe that there are
energies outside the body
that, when they interact with
the particular metabolism
or biochemistry of
that individual,
sets up an energy interplay
that causes the body
to go into hypothalamus
overdrive, if you will,
raising the body's
temperature biochemically
or bioelectrically
as if the person were
struck by a microwave
energy of great intensity.
But that energy comes from
outside the person's body.
Happens to be where
they're standing or sitting
at the moment, or
something that comes
in from the upper atmosphere
or even outer space.
We have cases of people being
struck by ball lightning.
Causes spontaneous combustion.
>>NOORY: Explain what
ball lightning is.
>>ARNOLD: Ball lightning
is a plasma-like energy,
electric lightning-like,
but not quite the same.
When we began our
research in the '70s,
ball lightning was
dismissed as a mythology.
>>NOORY: It can go
through glass, right?
>>ARNOLD: It can go
through solids, yes.
That has been documented.
Now ball lightning is an
accepted scientific fact.
It's been able to be
recreated in a laboratory.
Spontaneous human
combustion was also
dismissed when we
began our research.
And, unfortunately for
those who still die from it,
it's still being dismissed
by mainstream science.
But when people
see ball lightning
coming at their bodies
from the upper atmosphere,
or coming through a window when
they're looking in a mirror,
and that ball of energy
strikes the body,
it produces a first, second,
perhaps even third degree
burn to their flesh.
>>NOORY: Geez.
Scary.
>>ARNOLD: It's scary.
It's frightening.
It's fearsome.
And yet, at least for us,
it's incredibly fascinating--
>>NOORY: It is fascinating.
>>ARNOLD: Because it
raises so many questions--
>>NOORY: If you have a morbid
sense, it's fascinating.
>>ARNOLD: It raises
so many questions
about what the human
body can do to itself
that western medicine and
the fire service industry
clearly doesn't yet understand.
>>NOORY: Larry,
you've brought us
several cases and some
pictures of these episodes.
Let's talk about one
of them right now.
What do we have?
>>ARNOLD: Let's start
with Mary Reeser.
>>NOORY: Mary Reeser.
>>ARNOLD: Reeser.
Mary Hardy Reeser.
This is the case that
introduced us to the phenomenon.
She met her flaming
fate in 1951, July 2,
in St. Petersburg, Florida.
The night before, she was
about 175-pound woman,
apparently in fairly
decent health.
She was in a known smoker.
She took two Seconal
tablets to go
to sleep that night in her
chair and was discovered
the following morning reduced
to about eight pounds of ash
and rubble sitting behind
one foot, a few pieces
of calcine vertebrae, and
what was said at the time
to be her head that had
shrunken to the size of about
a grapefruit.
In a high heat fire, that's
not supposed to happen.
>>NOORY: No, not at all.
>>ARNOLD: No
surrounding fire damage,
heat damage of any
significance, was found.
This was a hot story
in St. Petersburg,
Florida in the summer of 1951.
And when we read
about it, we went
to the Library of Congress,
pulled up the original news
clips and said, you know, there
appears to be something really
odd here.
But we thought, maybe it's
the one exception to the rule
that this really doesn't happen.
Maybe there was a prosaic,
conventional explanation.
The local investigators at the
time ruled out accelerants.
They ruled out foul play.
They dismissed lightning.
>>NOORY: Foul play being
somebody doused her
in gasoline or something.
>>ARNOLD: That was actually
proposed at the time.
Somebody suggested that a
murderer arsonist had broken
into Mary's apartment,
doused her body,
killed her, took her
outside the apartment,
and then burned it, and
then brought the ashes back
into the apartment.
>>NOORY: Pieces back in, yeah.
And so cleverly laid
them out, right?
>>ARNOLD: Right.
Why would one do this?
I don't know.
The case that really
enthralled us, convinced us
that something truly abnormal
and fortean is happening here
was what happened to
Dr. John Irving Bentley
in our home state
of Pennsylvania.
>>NOORY: And we have
a picture of that.
>>ARNOLD: On December
5, 1966, Dr. Bentley
was found by a local
gas meter reader
to have burned himself
almost wholly to ash.
Dr. Bentley's
legacy to the world,
and what has probably become
the most famous fire fatality
photograph now on record, is
one half of one leg lying next
to a two-by-three-foot hole
that the rest of his body burned
through in his bathroom,
leaving on the earthen floor
in the basement below a
pile of ash about 15 inches
in diameter, five
inches in height.
>>NOORY: How much would the
body have to burn, and how long,
to reduce it to
cinders like that?
>>ARNOLD: Well, the
naysayers of spon com
contend that these
people slowly immolate
in a prolonged, smoldering
fire for many, many hours.
>>NOORY: They die instantly.
>>ARNOLD: By
burning their flesh,
burning the fat in their flesh.
Dr. Bentley consumed himself
no more than 11 hours.
Mrs. Reeser probably
consumed herself in four
to four and a half
hours maximum.
The case of Helen Conway in
southeastern Pennsylvania
in 1964, we have locked down
the time frame from the time
that she was known to be alive
until the firefighters arrived
to her second floor
sitting room to a fire
that they did not
have to put out.
That time window is
six minutes maximum.
>>NOORY: That's brutally fast.
>>ARNOLD: That is brutally fast.
And no fire investigator,
no arson specialists
that we have interviewed
in the decades
that we have been
researching this phenomenon,
can explain how Mrs.
Conway left behind
two legs propped up against
the front of her sitting chair
and not much else of her body.
>>NOORY: Just two legs there.
>>ARNOLD: Two legs propped
up, in six minutes.
>>NOORY: Do you think they're
in pain when this happens?
>>ARNOLD: We do not
think they're in pain.
And this is one of
the other hallmarks
of classic spontaneous
human combustion
that defies common sense,
refutes everything that
is known logically about
the effects of fire
in the human body.
Both the survivors tell
us, and the eyewitnesses
tell us, that the people who
experience this phenomenon are
exhibiting no outward
manifestation of agony
or pain, the kind
that common sense says
should be experienced--
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah you
would think by that people
would be screaming.
>>ARNOLD: By people who
find their bodies aflame.
People who drop
cigarettes on themselves
and are alert to the condition,
yeah, they're scared.
They're frightened.
They're often in pain.
Third and fourth degree burns
are very agonizing normally,
but not when evidence suggests
that the cause of death
or injury is spontaneous
human combustion.
It appears to us that
whatever is the process that
causes this phenomenon
circumvents or decouples
the passage of nerve signals
to the brain to register pain.
>>NOORY: Frightening.
>>ARNOLD: Frightening, yes.
>>NOORY: It really
is frightening.
>>ARNOLD: It's bizarre.
>>NOORY: Larry, we've
got some questions.
First of all, Cheryl from
an undisclosed location
has a question for Larry Arnold.
>>CALLER: My name
is Cheryl, and I
was wondering if the human
body can cremate itself
biochemically, and
if that would explain
some of the human combustion
stories we know of.
>>NOORY: So what do you
think of that, Larry?
>>ARNOLD: Cheryl raises
a very interesting point.
We certainly have
considered biochemistry
as one of the avenues to explain
spontaneous human combustion.
People who reactions
to niacin, inositol,
which the flesh becomes hot--
>>NOORY: Flushed.
>>ARNOLD: Hot feeling, flushed.
If something else is going on in
the person's body at the time,
it may produce in
an extreme reaction
to those particular
drugs chemically.
Basically any
hormone or chemical
that impacts the
hypothalamus, which
is the body's thermostat,
causing the hypothalamus
to kick in overdrive to create
tremendous thermogenesis
in the body almost
instantaneously,
is an avenue to
consider biochemically
to explain this phenomenon.
>>NOORY: You know, I would think
that paper is easily flammable,
and other kinds of
material, cloth and cotton
and things like that.
You don't think of the human
body as being burnable at all.
>>ARNOLD: The human body
is very fire resistant.
Even in vehicular
accidents, where
thousands of gallons of
gasoline have been involved,
in the ensuing inferno, the
victims trapped in that inferno
can still be identified
through dental records.
The body is almost
impervious to fire
under normal circumstances.
Certainly the cases
that we have found
do not fit the
characteristics of what one
finds in a crematorium retort.
And we often say to the
naysayers of our research,
if it's so easy to drop a
cigarette or a lit match
on a body and have it burn
to powder in a few hours,
why do crematorium operators
spend hundreds of thousands
of dollars on
retorts and filters
and cremulators to grind up the
bone fragments that come out
of the retort, when they could
simply take a $0.25 cigarette,
lay it on the cadaver,
have a cup of coffee, maybe
a quick lunch, and come back
and scrape up the ashes?
Doesn't work that way.
>>NOORY: Do we get a lot
of these cases, Larry?
I mean, is this common?
>>ARNOLD: It is
not common, which
is why it's so easy
for the officials
to deny that the reality of
spontaneous human combustion
exists.
It's an incredibly
rare phenomenon.
Over the last, say,
450 to 500 years,
we have about 500
cases that appear
to fit the concept of
spontaneous human combustion.
So divide that number
into the number
of people that have been
alive during that time,
the odds of being
a victim of the SHC
are much lower than being struck
multiple times by lightning.
>>NOORY: What about if
people eat something?
Is that possible?
Something that might
be a catalyst for this?
>>ARNOLD: Diet may be a factor.
In the case of Dr. Bentley,
we were told by his caretakers
that the last three years
of Dr. Bentley's life,
he subsisted solely on a diet
of shredded wheat and coffee.
>>NOORY: If you had
said chili peppers,
I would have understood.
>>ARNOLD: You would
have understood, yeah.
It's one of the problems
with our research.
The kind of information
that we feel
that we need to better isolate
the conditions necessary
for the phenomenon are factors
that fire scientists don't log
into the reports, that first
responders simply don't write
down in their incident logs.
So things like diet,
mental attitude,
any kind of physical malady that
might be common to the victims,
we just don't know about
because that information,
unfortunately, is not logged
into the historical database.
>>NOORY: Is this happening,
Larry, worldwide?
>>ARNOLD: It is
happening worldwide.
Spontaneous human
combustion, as far
as our research demonstrates,
is a global phenomenon.
It happens in every
continent save Antarctica.
It happens more often per
capita in the United Kingdom,
according to our research, than
anywhere else in the world.
>>NOORY: I wonder why.
>>ARNOLD: In part
we suspect it's
because the cases are probably
more honestly reported
in the UK.
They're more interested in the
sensational aspect of the fire,
so that tips us off
that something odd
is happening in this
particular instance.
The UK seems also
to be an area that
is a focus for unusual or
concentrated telluric energies
of the type that
geophysicists currently
don't understand or recognize.
But our research has plotted
the cases of pyro phenomena,
both to the human
body and to property,
in the United Kingdom.
And we found that once we do
the plotting, more than 80%
of those cases can be connected
by straight alignments.
That's a remarkable discovery.
We call it the
cartography of combustion.
Where you are physically in your
body, or with your possessions,
may cause you to be more
incendiary than otherwise.
The evidence that supports
the alignment of unusual fires
has led us to discover
new cases that we did not
know about by following those
trackways of fire alignments.
And also, in 1980, the case
of Henry Thomas in Wales
happened after we
plotted those alignments.
And we found his location
of his self-immolation
by following the trackways
that we had tracked
or plotted earlier
through Wales.
So the concept of
cartography of combustion
really holds up strongly.
>>NOORY: Now here's
a bizarre question.
>>ARNOLD: Oh, good.
>>NOORY: If there are
any bizarre questions.
What if this is demonic?
What if all the people who
got killed, who combusted,
were, I don't know, devil
worshippers, or something
happened?
Is it possible that some
demonic force, the pits of hell
opened up and engulfed them?
>>ARNOLD: We know for a fact
that all the victims are not
demonic worshippers.
We've spoken to survivors.
We've spoken to their spouses.
We know that that's
not the case.
To your broader question,
though, we cannot rule it out.
In the world of
forteana, one has
to be open to all
kinds of possibilities.
>>NOORY: Until you
get that answer.
>>ARNOLD: Until
we get the answer,
or until we find enough
evidence to rule out
certain possibilities.
What happens inside the
human consciousness,
and how that relates
to physiology
and processes biologically,
is such wide-open field
for investigation
and consideration
and theorizing that we're
not willing to rule out
much of anything until
the evidence tells us
we have to go there.
And right now the
evidence doesn't tell us
we can't acknowledge
the possibility of that.
>>NOORY: Let's go to
Santa Monica, California,
where David has a
question for Larry
Arnold on spontaneous
human combustion.
>>CALLER: Hi.
I'm Dave in Santa
Monica, California.
And I wanted to
know if Larry thinks
that a person diet has
anything to do with being
in danger of combusting.
>>NOORY: So we were
talking earlier, Larry,
about food and diet, and David
has that same kind of question.
Let's rehash that.
>>ARNOLD: Aside from Dr.
Bentley's three-year diet
of shredded wheat and coffee,
we just don't have any evidence.
>>NOORY: What a great
commercial that would be.
>>ARNOLD: It would be.
Do not live like that.
We just don't have the evidence.
We don't have the data to answer
Dave's question in any detail
whatsoever.
This is something that,
unfortunately, first responders
don't file that information
on their incident reports.
If there was a
commonality, we just
don't have the evidence
to say yes or no to it.
>>NOORY: Is science
investigating this at all?
I mean, you're doing this.
A few other people are.
But is science really
following up on this?
>>ARNOLD: To the best
of our knowledge,
this is an area that science
really doesn't want to touch,
certainly not those in the
fire service profession.
When we have had senior fire
instructors at the National
Fire Academy in Emmitsburg
literally spin on their heels
and run away from us rather
than confront the evidence
that we're trying
to present to them--
>>NOORY: Do they think
you're wack jobs or what?
>>ARNOLD: We think it comes down
to a situation of xenophobia.
This is so disturbing to
their reality construct,
so distressing to
their understanding
of what they think
they know about
fire in the human body, that
many of them choose simply
not to deal with it.
When we do find open-minded
fire inspectors, arson
investigators, and
we show them the data
and we explain the circumstances
under which Mary Reeser or Dr.
Bentley consumed themselves,
what we hear first is,
that's weird.
Very strange.
And now you've got me curious,
which is what we like to hear,
because only when people
are open-minded and curious
to the evidence that we present
to them will we come closer,
someday, to understanding
how this phenomena can best
be explained, and
perhaps even prevented.
>>NOORY: Well, the pictures
that you have shown us,
where you can see the leg, and
everything else is just gone.
It's just gone to ashes.
It's just-- it's crazy.
It really just defies
logic, doesn't it?
>>ARNOLD: It absolutely does
defy common sense and logic.
One of the critics of
spontaneous human combustion
avows that there
is no known case
in which the internal
organs of a human body
are burned more completely
than are the external parts.
And that person argues,
therefore, that SHC,
which would burn from
within, cannot happen.
Well, in the case
of Mary Reeser,
in the case of Dr. Bentley, in
the case of Danny Vanzandt, who
consumed himself through
his kitchen floor
in Oklahoma in 2013,
those individuals
left behind no internal organs.
Danny Vanzandt did
leave behind his heart,
yes, but no pancreas,
no liver, nothing else.
Just gone, powdered.
>>ARNOLD: You think, Larry,
if we made a concerted effort
to get more of these
cases publicized,
if we asked for them, let's say,
on "Beyond Belief" or "Coast
to Coast" on a
regular basis, you
would see those cases increase?
Is that possible?
>>ARNOLD: It's
not only possible.
We absolutely believe that
that would be the situation.
The incident number
would increase.
We've been told by state
police fire marshals
that they have known of cases,
particularly in Pennsylvania,
our home state, where the local
authorities ordered photographs
not to be taken.
They found the fire
scenes that disturbing.
They didn't want to have
to deal with the aftermath
of a detailed investigation.
Don't take a photograph.
Then the evidence
goes away and we
don't have to do deal with is.
>>NOORY: We don't have
to deal with this case.
>>ARNOLD: We can understand
that psychologically.
But scientifically
and intellectually,
it's fraudulent.
It's not helpful at all.
>>NOORY: How do people
get ahold of you, Larry,
if they want to tell you
about some of these cases?
>>ARNOLD: Go to the internet.
Go to ParaScience.com.
That will give the
person our email address.
Contact us that way.
Put 17110-2899 on an envelope,
our exclusive zip code.
It will get to us.
We need to know about cases.
The larger the
database that we have,
the better we and our
colleagues will have--
>>NOORY: You're going
to have more results.
>>ARNOLD: To better
understand what
is happening in these
incredibly illogical,
nonsensical fire scenes
that history categorically
demonstrates do indeed happen.
>>NOORY: It's got to be
frustrating for researchers
like you who want to
get these answers.
It's got to be frustrating.
>>ARNOLD: It is frustrating.
At times it's also bemusing.
When we have been ushered
out of the headquarters
of the Philadelphia
Fire Department
because we showed up asking
for cases that happened
in their jurisdiction and
were told that they have
no such fire files because
such cases, as we're describing
to them, don't occur.
And then we show
them our photographs
and explain the
situations, and we
ask, what would you
do, as the expert
in this large city of fires?
What would you do to explain
this situation to us who
is looking for answers?
And that fire investigator tells
us point blank, straight-faced,
I'd go out, get drunk, and
forget about it, at which point
we are told to pack up our
stuff and we are escorted
physically out of the building.
>>NOORY: Fire departments
are frustrating.
We tried to get a
fireman here to talk
with him about spontaneous
human combustion.
And once I think they
realized what the topic really
was, they literally shied away
and poof, they didn't show up.
I mean, does that
happen on and on?
>>ARNOLD: It does
happen, regrettably.
Our sense is that they have so
much invested in their training
and in their education.
And if the subject is brought
up at a fire training seminar,
it's always presented as
mythology or superstition.
>>NOORY: Or a joke.
>>ARNOLD: Or a joke.
You know, these people
simply dropped an accelerant,
a match, a cigarette
on themselves,
and they slowly immolated
in their body fat.
They don't appreciate
the rapidity,
the amount of fuel loading
that's necessary so often.
And they don't like
to be challenged.
They're comfortable with
their knowledge base,
with their reality construct.
And our cases really throw
that into immediate question.
That means they have
to learn something new.
And sadly, people with--
>>NOORY: It's something
strangely bizarre.
>>ARNOLD: Yes.
People with PhDs tend
to be heavily invested
in their area of expertise.
And we come along,
and history says,
your expertise maybe isn't as
complete as you think it is.
>>NOORY: But I'm glad there
are people like you, Larry,
that are out there investigating
these unusual circumstances.
I mean, I think that's
important, don't you?
>>ARNOLD: We feel
it's very important.
There's a great
deal of knowledge
and new understanding
that can be
garnered from looking at the
cases that we've documented.
Why does the body
do this to itself?
How can it be explained?
What new knowledge can we learn
by looking at this evidence?
Are there ways to prevent
this from happening
to people in the future?
We hope so.
But as several
firefighters have told us,
I'll be happy to contact
you about these cases
if they occur,
but really, I hope
I don't have to contact
you, because I really
don't want to deal with this.
>>NOORY: Let's go
to another caller.
We've got Deborah in New York.
Let's listen in.
>>CALLER: Hi.
I'm Deborah in New
York, and I want
to know what role
quantum physics plays
in spontaneous human combustion.
>>NOORY: How would you
answer that, Larry?
>>ARNOLD: Deborah raises
a profound and provocative
inquiry into spontaneous
human combustion.
There is a tremendous
amount of energy required
to incinerate a
body, particularly
in a very short period of
time, something like 34
million calories of energy.
How can we create that at one
of these localized fire scenes?
We've looked at quantum
physics for an answer.
And we found that in order to
generate 34 million calories
of energy very quickly, you
have to bring the moisture
content of the body up
to its boiling point,
and then blow it off as steam.
That's the only way you're
going to get dry powder at one
of these fire scenes.
To do that can be explained
by applying quantum physics
mathematically to the
energy load that's
necessary to do this.
And we come up with what
we've doubled the pyrotron.
It's an incredibly
small particle,
behaves much like a neutrino.
Zaps through the
body almost always
without any harm or
injury to the body tissue,
to the atoms in the body.
But on occasion, if one of
these incredibly high-energy
nanomicroscopic
particles impacts
a quark or an atom in the
body, it blows off that energy
instantaneously, sufficient
energy to immediately evaporate
the body's moisture content.
And we think quantum physics
provides a really solid avenue
to explaining some
cases, particularly
the classic cases of
spontaneous human combustion.
It's a great question.
>>NOORY: You started earlier
talking about survivors.
How many survivors are there
with these kinds of cases?
>>ARNOLD: Far more than we know.
It's been our
privilege to interview
about two dozen survivors of
spontaneous partial spontaneous
human combustion, obviously.
Now we're not talking Dr.
Bentley or Mary Reeser,
clearly.
What they tell us
is that they would
be sitting having a
conversation with a spouse,
minding their own
business, driving a car.
In the case of Peter Jones, he
was sitting first on his bed
on a morning in October, 1980,
getting dressed to go to work.
Suddenly white smoke
began gushing out
of both of his forearms.
His wife Barbara was
still in bed with him.
She said, what the hell
is going on, Peter?
He says, I don't know.
>>NOORY: Do you
smell burning flesh?
>>ARNOLD: Did not.
No odor at all.
She got up and started
patting his legs,
patting his arms to
put out the fire.
>>NOORY: Throw
him in the shower.
>>ARNOLD: The shower.
And the smoke disappeared,
leaving the two of them
to marvel about this
incredibly bizarre,
inexplicable phenomenon that
just had afflicted Peter.
>>NOORY: And he wasn't
cooked from within?
>>ARNOLD: No.
No.
>>NOORY: He lucked out.
>>ARNOLD: Yeah.
He got dressed, went
about his business.
That afternoon he was sitting
in his automobile at a railroad
grade crossing,
waiting for the train
to go by so he could
proceed further.
And while his hands were
on the steering wheel,
for the second time in that
remarkable day in Peter Jones'
life, again, white smoke--
>>NOORY: Started again?
>>ARNOLD: Gushed
out of his arms,
filled up the
interior of the car.
Peter remained calm under
fire, if you will, rolled down
the windows, vented the smoke.
The train went by.
He drove home.
He never told his wife Barbara
about the second episode
until the two of them
were watching a program
that we did for ABC
Television in 1980
called "That's Incredible,"
talking about none
other than Dr. Bentley.
>>NOORY: I remember that.
>>ARNOLD: And Peter
turned to his wife
and said, do you remember
that episode last October when
I smoked in bed, so to speak?
She said yes.
Well, it happened to me
the second time that day.
And I just didn't have the
courage to tell you about it.
>>NOORY: And nothing since.
>>ARNOLD: Nothing.
Well, there's possibly a
third episode for Peter,
but neither he nor we are
convinced that it's SHC.
>>NOORY: This poor guy's going
to go up one day, isn't he?
>>ARNOLD: He
actually, for awhile,
when he traveled he took a
fire extinguisher with him
at a hotel.
Yeah, he was concerned,
and reasonably so.
>>NOORY: But you've had
a lot of cases like that.
>>ARNOLD: We have a few
multiple survivors of it, yes.
But mostly they're
individual one-offs,
where the flesh will
smoke or blister.
The most remarkable case
of a survivor that we have
is Jack Angel.
In fact, he was the first
person that we had the privilege
to meet who we believe survived
partial spontaneous human
combustion.
A remarkable case.
He was a traveling salesman
working out of a motor home.
In November of 1974 he was
on his way to a sales call,
parked the motor home
outside of a Ramada Inn
in Savannah, Georgia.
He did not have
a room that night
so he slept in the
motor home, expecting
to get up the next morning
and meet with his client.
He overslept for quite
a long period of time.
When he did come to wakened
state consciousness,
he noticed that
his right forearm,
down to the fingertips,
was charred black.
Severe third degree burn.
No pain.
He looked around.
No damage to the sheets
on which his body lay.
Pajama tops unburned.
No other damage
to the motor home.
Got dressed, exited, lost
consciousness at the hotel.
Regained consciousness in
the hospital in Savannah
surrounded by a
team of physicians
trying to figure out how this
guy burned in the fashion
that he did.
>>NOORY: And he
didn't even know it.
>>ARNOLD: Didn't even know it.
Only then, many hours
later, did Jack Angel
start to exhibit the agonizing
pain that one would think
he would have awakened to, or
that indeed would have awakened
him in the first place.
A team of liability
lawyers in Atlanta
took the case on a
contingency basis,
thinking they were going to
make a $3 million settlement.
Something in the motor home
had to cause Jack's burns.
>>NOORY: Sure, you would think.
>>ARNOLD: The motor home was
torn down to the grill base.
Nothing could be found.
There was no lightning
storms outside at the time.
>>NOORY: No chars, nothing.
>>ARNOLD: No char, no
damage in the motor home.
They speculated-- "speculated"
that Jack Angel had scalded
himself due to a malfunctioning
in the plumbing of the motor
home, but they could
not substantiate that.
The case had to be,
quote, pulled from court
because the lawyers simply could
not meet the burden of proof.
Medical records that we
have from Jack's treatment
attest to the burns
being third degree,
electric-like in nature,
and most importantly,
internal in origin.
His physicians
attested to the burns
having begun inside
Jack's forearm, burning
outward to the surface.
Besides the forearm that
was burned black to a crisp,
as Jack told us, he had other
high-energy heat damage wounds
to his left chest, almost
an explosive-like injury.
Also damage to his legs, his
groin, the nape of his neck,
and internal fusing of
disks in his vertebrae.
Scalding water will not produce
that kind of a burn injury.
So if we accept the expert
testimony of the attending
physicians, we
have clear support
that Jack Angel not
only experienced
spontaneous human
combustion, but lived
to tell the incredible tale.
He's one angel who literally
dealt with hell's fire
and came out triumphant.
>>NOORY: Have there
been cases way gone back
in antiquity of people
talking about this?
>>ARNOLD: If you look
at the historical record
from Greek, Roman,
Norse mythology,
legends, sagas, with
an eye to accepting
the reality of spontaneous
human combustion,
the answer is unequivocally yes.
>>NOORY: That is amazing.
>>ARNOLD: It is amazing.
This is a malady that
has apparently afflicted
mankind for millennia.
And yet in 2015, the
mainstream medical community
denies the evidence,
denies the concept,
despite overwhelming evidence
photographically, historically,
and medically that this is a
real phenomenon that cries out
for understanding and research.
>>NOORY: Larry, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
I really appreciate it.
>>ARNOLD: Thank you, George,
for this exquisite opportunity
to share our research with
you and your audience.
Please contact us if you have an
idea about how this can happen.
If you have a case
that fits the concept
that you and we have been
discussing during this program,
please contact us.
The more information
that we have,
the closer we are going to
come, someday, to understanding
and hopefully preventing
this phenomenon
from happening again.
>>NOORY: Truly,
of all the stories
I've covered in my
career in broadcasting,
spontaneous human
combustion is going
to rank way up at the top.
You heard it from Larry Arnold.
I'm George Noory.
And thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."